---
title: Talk: Practical Strategies for Data Storytelling
date: 2024-05-14
status: draft
slug: storytelling-odsc-2024
---

I gave a talk at the Open Data Science Conference a few weeks ago titled: 
[Practical Strategies for Data Storytelling](https://odsc.com/speakers/practical-strategies-for-data-storytelling/).
I have more to say on the subject, but in the meantime you can see my 
[slides and speaker notes here](/static/odsc2024/index.html#p1).

---

For the last two years, I've hosted a biweekly data storytelling workshop
for my peers at Shopify.
This talk is an attempt to share some of my experience more broadly.

<!-- Maybe include the slide and intro blurb here instead -->

I was surprised by the turnout we had -
a lot of data folks want to improve their storytelling.
Unfortunately, a lot of these folks also don't know where to start.

That's not surprising.
Storytelling is the vaguest part of most data science job ladders.
Many of the folks trying to improve their storytelling
don't know what data storytelling _is_.
No wonder it's so hard to improve.

The other big problem I see 
is that folks don't know how to start their storytelling practice.
They know they want to improve - 
but at a very tactical level they don't know what exercises to do.

I try to address both of these in my talk.

I have a lot more to say, but I don't have time right now.
The internet is littered with blogs promising another essay coming soon.
I won't make any promises here,
but fingers crossed - I hope to expand on this talk soon.


----

## Appendix





When folks get stuck trying to improve their data storytelling, 
there's usually two problems:

1. They don't know what data storytelling _is_,
   though they usually have some idea about why it's important
2. They don't know how to jump start their storytelling practice. 
   They don't have a useful feedback loop.
   





It's not hard to imagine. 
There's not a ton of writing on _how_ to do good data storytelling.
"Storytelling with data" is a good start, but over indexes on making graphics.
Graphs are only a small part of telling a good story.



----

and doesn't do much to explain what storytelling _is_. 

This can be very frustrating.

More often than not, 
when someone is told they need to improve their storytelling
they don't really know what good storytelling _is_.

Usually, when someone is struggling with storytelling
it's because they don't know what good storytelling _is_.

Folks usually get stuck for one of a few reasons:

* They don't understand what data storytelling _is_
* They don't feel comfortable being opinionated
* They don't understand their audience

One problem is that folks don't know what good storytelling _is_.

Most of the time, the issue is that it's not clear what good storytelling _is_.

but don't know how to get started.

Often the problem is that they don't know what good storytelling looks like.
They only know that they need to improve.

Part of the problem is that there's no good 

We had a great turnout for this talk.
Unfortunately some attendees couldn't attend due to seating capacity.
I wish the talk had been recorded.

I've found that lots of data folks want to improve their storytelling,
but they don't know how to get started.

Most of the time, the blocker is that they don't understand 
what good data storytelling _is_.

Most importantly, a lot of folks are confused about what good storytelling _is_.

We're not doing ourselves any favors with the mysticism around storytelling.

The first is that data storytelling is poorly understood.

---

This talk came because it's necessary.

Standing room only. Lots of interest.

Most vague part of a job ladder.

This talk came out of _practice_.
I've hosted a data storytelling workshop at Shopify for the last two years.

I've hosted a fortnightly workshop on data storytelling at Shopify for the last two years.

