title: What do you take home?
slug: notebook/2020-07-10

Every other week,
I go through my todo list and decide where I should focus my attention.
I review a list of prompts that help me choose important work.
One of the oldest prompts on my list is:
"**What will you take home at the end of the week?**".

I mentioned this a while ago in 
[this post](https://blog.harterrt.com/new_tools.html)
about evaluating new tools.

> I think of my [career as an asset](https://esimoney.com/two-huge-reasons-why-your-career-matters/),
> so if I get to do work that builds transferable skills,
> I count that as part of my compensation.
> On the other hand,
> if I'm writing glue scripts to deal with idiosyncrasies in an internal tool,
> I'm missing out.

In short, the type of work I do today
affects how valuable my career is in the long term.
I take this into account when choosing my work.

Mozilla is really strong in this dimension.
We're an open company
which means I get to work in the open,
work with open-source tools,
and blog about my work.

Writing is a great example of taking something home.
The obvious benefit is that I'll be able to reference my public writing forever.
Maybe a bigger benefit is the career capital I build by improving my writing 
and broadening my network.

For a long time, blogging was only a small part of how I worked in the open.
I got to write a bunch of code and prose on
[Github](https://github.com/harterrt).
I reviewed PR's in the open and commented on public bugs.
I'll be able to point to that work for a long time.

For the manager, this can be a great incentive for you reports.
I know working in the open played a part in my decision to work at Mozilla.
As I noted in [New Tools](https://blog.harterrt.com/new_tools.html),
you can help your reports take something home by using open source tools internally.
These things are like instant raises that don't cost the company a dime.
